= What is it

The <tt>maven-dependency-versions-check-plugin</tt> is a Maven plugin that verifies that the resolved versions of dependencies are mutually compatible
with each other. While Maven does a good job in dependency resolution, it usually applied the "higher version wins" algorithm to select a dependency and
is not aware of any semantic notions of version number (e.g. that artifacts with different major version numbers are not comaptible. 

More specifically, it will check that

* The resolved version of every dependency declared explicitly in the current POM is the same or at least compatible with the one that was stated.
* For every explicitly declared dependency in the current POM, all its dependency versions are met. I.e. the resolved versions for all dependencies are compatible to the version stated in that dependency's POM.

The plugin can configured to issue warnings or fail the build in that case.

= How to get it

Currently, the plugin is not in a public repository yet, so you'll have to build it yourself. First clone the git repository and then simply do

    mvn install

This will install the plugin into your local repository and make it available for use. To make commandline usage a bit easier, you should add the
<tt>com.ning.maven.plugins</tt> group to the <tt>pluginGroups</tt> section in your settings file:

    <settings>
      ...
      <pluginGroups>
        <pluginGroup>com.ning.maven.plugins</pluginGroup>
      </pluginGroups>
      ...
    </settings>

= How to use it

The plugin as two goals:

* com.ning.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-versions-check-plugin:list lists out all dependencies in the project
* com.ning.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-versions-check-plugin:check checks all the dependencies in the project and can fail the build.

== The "list" goal

This goal reports a list of all dependencies that are used in the current project:

    % mvn com.ning.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-versions-check-plugin:list

    [...]
    [INFO] [dependency-versions-check:list {execution: default-cli}]
    [INFO] Transitive dependencies for scope 'compile':
    [INFO] backport-util-concurrent:backport-util-concurrent: backport-util-concurrent:backport-util-concurrent-3.1 (3.1)
    [INFO] classworlds:classworlds:                           classworlds:classworlds-1.1-alpha-2 (1.1-alpha-2)
    [INFO] com.pyx4j:maven-plugin-log4j:                      com.pyx4j:maven-plugin-log4j-1.0.1 (*1.0.1*)
    [INFO] commons-collections:commons-collections:           commons-collections:commons-collections-3.2.1 (*3.2.1*)
    [INFO] commons-lang:commons-lang:                         commons-lang:commons-lang-2.5 (*2.5*)
    [INFO] junit:junit:                                       junit:junit-3.8.1 (3.8.1)
    [INFO] log4j:log4j:                                       log4j:log4j-1.2.16 (1.2.14, *1.2.16*)
    [INFO] org.apache.maven.wagon:wagon-provider-api:         org.apache.maven.wagon:wagon-provider-api-1.0-beta-6 (1.0-beta-6)
    [INFO] org.apache.maven:maven-artifact:                   org.apache.maven:maven-artifact-2.2.1 (2.0, 2.2.1)
    [INFO] org.apache.maven:maven-artifact-manager:           org.apache.maven:maven-artifact-manager-2.2.1 (2.2.1)
    [INFO] org.apache.maven:maven-model:                      org.apache.maven:maven-model-2.2.1 (2.2.1)
    [INFO] org.apache.maven:maven-plugin-api:                 org.apache.maven:maven-plugin-api-2.2.1 (2.0, *2.2.1*)
    [INFO] org.apache.maven:maven-plugin-registry:            org.apache.maven:maven-plugin-registry-2.2.1 (2.2.1)
    [INFO] org.apache.maven:maven-profile:                    org.apache.maven:maven-profile-2.2.1 (2.2.1)
    [INFO] org.apache.maven:maven-project:                    org.apache.maven:maven-project-2.2.1 (*2.2.1*)
    [INFO] org.apache.maven:maven-repository-metadata:        org.apache.maven:maven-repository-metadata-2.2.1 (2.2.1)
    [INFO] org.apache.maven:maven-settings:                   org.apache.maven:maven-settings-2.2.1 (2.2.1)
    [INFO] org.codehaus.plexus:plexus-container-default:      org.codehaus.plexus:plexus-container-default-1.0-alpha-9-stable-1 (1.0-alpha-9-stable-1)
    [INFO] org.codehaus.plexus:plexus-interpolation:          org.codehaus.plexus:plexus-interpolation-1.11 (1.11)
    [INFO] org.codehaus.plexus:plexus-utils:                  org.codehaus.plexus:plexus-utils-1.5.15 (1.0.4, 1.5.15)
    [INFO] org.slf4j:slf4j-api:                               org.slf4j:slf4j-api-1.6.1 (*1.6.1*)
    [INFO] org.slf4j:slf4j-log4j12:                           org.slf4j:slf4j-log4j12-1.6.1 (*1.6.1*)
    [...]

This is the dependency list for the plugin itself. Every line contains of the following elements:

* actual dependency - The dependency that was resolved based on the project POM.
* resolved dependency - The dependency that was chosen to be included.
* additional versions - In braces, one or more dependency versions. These are the versions that were under consideration when choosing the final dependency. 

If a dependency is surrounded by "*", it was declared in the project POM.
If a dependency is surrounded by "!", then it is in conflict. Running the check plugin will flag this as error and might fail the build.

=== Options for the "list" goal

These options are intended to be given on the command line. They can also be configured in the config section (see below) but are less useful.

* scope - selects the scope for the dependency list. Can be "compile" (the default), "test" or "runtime".
* directOnly (boolean) - if present, only list dependencies that are declared in the project POM. Transitive versions are still resolved and additional versions might be listed.
* conflictsOnly (boolean) - list only dependencies that are in conflict.

== The "check" goal

This goal checks all the dependencies, reports only problems and might fail the build if configured.

It is intended to be run as part of the normal build cycle. In this case, it should be added like this:

    <plugin>
      <groupId>com.ning.maven.plugins</groupId>
      <artifactId>maven-dependency-versions-check-plugin</artifactId>
      <executions>
        <execution>
          <phase>verify</phase>
          <goals>
            <goal>check</goal>
          </goals>
        </execution>
      </executions>
    </plugin>

If the plugin finds a conflict, then it will output something like

    [INFO] Checking dependency versions
    [WARNING] Found a problem with the direct dependency log4j:log4j of the current project
      Expected version is 1.2.13
      Resolved version is 1.2.13
      Version 1.2.16 was expected by artifact: org.jboss.netty:netty

The above sample shows a conflict with a dependency declared in the current POM. In this case, it will print
* the expected version of the current POM
* the resolved version (i.e. effective POM)
* all versions that were encountered during dependency resolution plus the dependencies that brought them in.

If the problem is instead between dependencies, then it will omit the expected version.

The above will change to <tt>[ERROR]</tt> if the plugin is configured to fail the build in case of conflicts (see below).

= POM configuration section

Note also that any configuration in a POM overrides the default configuration (e.g. from the parent POM), so you should duplicate that configuration or use the very 
arcane 'combine.children' trick (see http://www.sonatype.com/people/2007/06/how-to-merge-sub-items-from-parent-pom-to-child-pom-in-a-maven-plugin-configuration-2/ for details...).

== exceptions

In rare cases you need to configure the plugin to make exceptions, i.e. allow specific version conflicts. For instance, in the above example
you might insist that <tt>log4j</tt> version 1.2.13 is fine:  

    <plugin>
      <groupId>com.ning.maven.plugins</groupId>
      <artifactId>maven-dependency-versions-check-plugin</artifactId>
      <configuration>
        <exceptions>
          <exception>
            <groupId>log4j</groupId>
            <artifactId>log4j</artifactId>
            <expectedVersion>1.2.13</expectedVersion>
            <resolvedVersion>1.2.16</resolvedVersion>
          </exception>
        </exceptions>
      </configuration>
    </plugin>


An exception is only for a specific version conflict, in this case 1.2.13 instead of 1.2.16. If the plugin finds that a different version of <tt>log4j</tt>
was resolved or required, say 1.2.15, then you will get additional warnings/errors that would have to be handled with additional exceptions.

An exception must have all four elements (groupId, artifactId, expectedVersion and resolvedVersion) present.

== warnIfMajorVersionIsHigher

Boolean flag that enables warnings if a dependency that was excluded from version resolution depends on an incompatible version 
(for historical reasons it is called 'warnIfMajorVersionIsHigher'). Default value is "false" (do not warn).

      <configuration>
        <warnIfMajorVersionIsHigher>true</warnIfMajorVersionIsHigher>
      </configuration>

== failBuildInCaseOfConflict (check only)

Boolean flag that will turn warnings about dependency problems into error messages and fail the build accordingly. Default value is "false" (only report warnings).
    
      <configuration>
        <failBuildInCaseOfConflict>true</failBuildInCaseOfConflict>
      </configuration>

== resolvers

Defines a version strategy resolver. Version strategy resolvers are used to determine which strategy to apply to decide whether two versions are compatible with each other.

      <configuration>
        <resolvers>
          <resolver>
            <id>apache-dependencies</id>
            <strategy>apr</strategy>
            <includes>
              <include>commons-configuration:commons-configuration</include>
              <include>org.apache.commons:*</include>
              <include>org.apache.maven.plugins.*</include>
              <include>org.apache*</include>
            </includes>
          </resolver>
        </resolvers>
      </configuration>

A resolver contains a strategy name (<strategy>) and a list of one or more includes to list the patterns of artifacts for which this resolvers should be used. Patterns can contain
wildcards (*) for both group and artifactName.

See below for more details on strategy resolvers.

== defaultStrategy

Selects the default strategy to fall back on when no match is found in the resolvers configuration. Defaults to "default".

See below for more details on strategies.

= Version resolving strategies

While maven uses a "highest version wins" approach to resolving dependencies (see below for more details), this is not always the best way to go. Often, version
numbers also carry semantic meaning (e.g. Apache APR versioning assigns indicators for forward- and backward-compatibility on each of the elements in a three-digit
version number). This plugin provides an indicator whether a set of dependencies resolved by maven actually "fits" and may fail at build time, thus avoiding failing
at run time.

To do so, it employs version resolving strategies. In the most simple use case, it uses the default strategy exclusively. But by using the <resolvers> section, it is
possible to tweak this and to allow custom strategies to be used.

== Strategies included with the plugin

==== default - the default strategy

This strategy is modelled after the actual maven version resolution.

It assumes that all smaller versions are compatible when replaced with
larger numbers and compares version elements from left to right. E.g.
3.2.1 > 3.2 and 2.1.1 > 1.0. It usually works pretty ok and is the
fallback for version resolution (unless changed with the
<defaultStrategy> setting in the configuration section.

==== apr - Apache APR versioning

Three digit versioning, assumes that for two versions to be
compatible, the first digit must be identical, the middle digit
indicates backwards compatibility (i.e. 1.2.x can replace 1.1.x but
1.4.x can not replace 1.5.x) and the third digit signifies the patch
level (only bug fixes, full API compatibility).

==== two-digits-backward-compatible - Relaxed APR versioning

Similar to APR, but assumes that there is no "major" version digit
(e.g. it is part of the artifact Id). All versions are backwards
compatible. First digit must be the same or higher to be compatible
(i.e. 2.0 can replace 1.2).

==== single-digit - Single version number

The version consists of a single number. Larger versions can replace
smaller versions. The version number may contain additional letters or
prefixes (i.e. r08 can replace r07).

== Writing your own strategies (advanced usage)

A custom strategy must implement the
com.ning.maven.plugins.dependencyversionscheck.strategy.Strategy
interface and must declare itself as a plexus component. A jar
containing a custom strategy can then used as a custom dependency of
the plugin:

    /**
     * @plexus.component role="com.ning.maven.plugins.dependencyversionscheck.strategy.Strategy" role-hint="bad"
     */
    public class BadStrategy implements Strategy
    {
        public String getName() { return "bad"; }

        public boolean isCompatible(Version a, Version b) { return false; };
    }

    <plugin>
      <groupId>com.ning.maven.plugins</groupId>
      <artifactId>maven-dependency-versions-check-plugin</artifactId>
      <dependencies>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>badExample</groupId>
          <artifactId>badStrategy</artifactId>
          <version>1.0</version>
        </dependency>
      </dependencies>
    .....
    </plugin>

See the source code to the plugin and the existing strategies for examples on how to write strategies.

= How to resolve conflicts

Some more detailed explanation is below in the background section.

In general, you should try to upgrade dependency versions if you can make sure that they work (e.g. via unit or other tests).
If you cannot do that, then either add exclusions or add an explicit dependency in the current POM.
If even this fails, then add an exception configuration, but please use this only as a last resort.
In this case you should add comments to the exceptions, exclusions or explicit dependencies that state why you added them (e.g. noting the version conflict).

== Background: Maven 2's arbitrary version resolution strategy

Consider four projects, A through D. A depends on B and C which both depend on D, but on different versions. E.g. B's and C's POM look like this:

    <project>
      <groupId>...</groupId>
      <artifactId>B</artifactId>
      ...
      <dependencies>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>D</artifactId>
          <version>1.0</version>
        </dependency>
      </dependencies>
    </project>

    <project>
      <groupId>...</groupId>
      <artifactId>C</artifactId>
      ...
      <dependencies>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>D</artifactId>
          <version>1.1</version>
        </dependency>
      </dependencies>
    </project>

If A's POM looks like this:

    <project>
      <groupId>...</groupId>
      <artifactId>A</artifactId>
      ...
      <dependencies>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>B</artifactId>
          <version>...</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>C</artifactId>
          <version>...</version>
        </dependency>
      </dependencies>
    </project>

Maven will resolve D's version to 1.0 because it will use the first version it encounters. This is obviously a problem since C needs at least version 1.1.
If we change A's POM to 

    <project>
      <groupId>...</groupId>
      <artifactId>A</artifactId>
      ...
      <dependencies>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>C</artifactId>
          <version>...</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>B</artifactId>
          <version>...</version>
        </dependency>
      </dependencies>
    </project>

then we'll get version 1.1.
However this is not a solution - imagine if B updates to version 1.2 of D ...

The common strategies to handle this are:

=== Specify an explicit dependency in A

    <project>
      <groupId>...</groupId>
      <artifactId>A</artifactId>
      ...
      <dependencies>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>B</artifactId>
          <version>...</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>C</artifactId>
          <version>...</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>D</artifactId>
          <version>1.1</version>
        </dependency>
      </dependencies>
    </project>

In this case, Maven uses the version that is specified in A's POM and ignores both B and C. Still won't help in the case that B or C update to a newer version, though.

=== Use dependency management in the parent POM

If B, and C use a common parent POM, then the version of D can be specified in that parent POM:

    <project>
      <groupId>...</groupId>
      <artifactId>ParentOfBAndC</artifactId>
      ...
      <dependencyManagement>
        <dependencies>
          <dependency>
            <groupId>...</groupId>
            <artifactId>D</artifactId>
            <version>1.1</version>
          </dependency>
        </dependencies>
      </dependencyManagement>
    </project>

This does not declare a dependency of ParentOfBAndC to D, but instead defines the version for all POMs that have this POM as a parent (unless a version is stated in that POM).
B and C then can be changed to this:

    <project>
      <parent>
        <groupId>...</groupId>
        <artifactId>ParentOfBAndC</artifactId>
      </parent>
      <groupId>...</groupId>
      <artifactId>B</artifactId>
      ...
      <dependencies>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>D</artifactId>
        </dependency>
      </dependencies>
    </project>

    <project>
      <parent>
        <groupId>...</groupId>
        <artifactId>ParentOfBAndC</artifactId>
      </parent>
      <groupId>...</groupId>
      <artifactId>C</artifactId>
      ...
      <dependencies>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>D</artifactId>
        </dependency>
      </dependencies>
    </project>

This way, B and C will get the same version. However if the version of D changes, both B and C will have to be released and A has to be updated to use both new
versions, or we have the same problem again.

=== Use exclusions

In some cases, we specifically don't want a transitive dependency. For instance, if in the above scenario we want to avoid version 1.1 in A, we could add an exclusion:

    <project>
      <groupId>...</groupId>
      <artifactId>A</artifactId>
      ...
      <dependencies>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>B</artifactId>
          <version>...</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>...</groupId>
          <artifactId>C</artifactId>
          <version>...</version>
          <exclusions>
            <exclusion>
              <groupId>...</groupId>
              <artifactId>D</artifactId>
            </exclusion>
          </exclusions>
        </dependency>
      </dependencies>
    </project>

This will have the effect of excluding the version of D that C brings to the party, so in our example it has the same effect as adding an explicit dependency to A.

There are additional, subtle interactions when enforced versions come into play (e.g. <tt>[1.0]</tt> in B's POM). You should generally avoid enforcing
versions this way.

